Research Software Engineering Groups in Universities: The Story from the UK
===========================================================================

Authors: James Hetherington, Simon Hettrick, James Spencer, Mark Stillwell,
Robert Haines (@all add names here)

In the UK, the last few years have seen increasing adoption of the title
"Research Software Engineer", to refer to those members of the research
community who principally contribute to the research effort through the
creation of software. Originating from the Software Sustainability Institute
Collaborations workshop in 2012, this term refers to a hybrid role, ideally
combining the best of both software engineer and researcher.

Until recently, most of those engaged in research software engineering at
universities have existed as RAs in individual research groups, with their job
performance measured against traditional academic career metrics (e.g.,
publications, grants). This is an unsatisfactory approach, as they are then
isolated and unable to learn from other scientific programmers. They are also
discouraged from applying their skills where they might have the greatest
impact: since efforts related to software quality and dissemination do not
facilitate progression in academic career tracks, they are quickly lost to
research, a leading cause of lack of sustainability and degradation of quality
in the research code inventory[@groen2015sdp]. 

The waste of effort inherent in creating large amounts of untestable and
unsustainable "PhDWare", "PaperWare", and "AbandonWare" has prompted changes in
policy by major funders, including Horizon2020[@eu:research],
EPSRC[@epsrc:software-as-infrastructure], and the European
Commission[@ec:software-technologies] to encourage the development of more
sustainable and reusable research software.

Going even further, UK research-intensive universities are starting to create
centralised Research Software Engineering Groups. By aggregating demand for
research software engineers across the institution, these groups are able to
provide a sustainable home for scientific programmers. Demand for the efforts
of these groups is high, with rapid growth trajectories common. A mixed model
of both free-at-the-point of use programming services offered to the
university, growth through grant funded project work, and leadership on
training researchers in reproducible computational research skills is the
typical approach. Such groups now exist at University College London,
Manchester, Southampton, Bristol and Sheffield, and more continue to emerge.

In addition to the groups at the institutions listed above, funding to
establish the Research Software Engineer role in the UK is being provided by
a new Research Software Engineering Fellowship offered by the Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council. This offers a prestigious research
council fellowship for expert collaborative support, rather than an
independent research programme; a first of its kind, and, we believe, an
important contribution to the future of team-based science.

The nature of the RSE role in universities contrasts those in national labs, which
have long offered a stable home for scientific programmers on large, sustained,
important software projects. However, the majority of scientific software is
the longer tail of research software used and developed in research groups in
academic institutions all over the world. The University RSE group offers a promising
solution to improve the quality and sustainability of these activities.
